Grafana and Prometheus
======================
Handwritten Kubernetes manifests; no Grafana or Prometheus Helm charts.
Grafana image: grafana/grafana:13.2.3. Prometheus: prom/prometheus:v3.15.0.

Installation
------------
1. Apply the ignored terraform-local infrastructure as documented there.
2. In GCP Secret Manager, add an enabled version of the secret
   assessment-grafana-admin-password in ornate-artifact-414911. Store only
   the chosen password as its value. Never put it in Git or the ZIP.
3. Merge the manifests into main. Flux installs Prometheus, then Grafana.
   No Terraform apply is needed for application changes.
4. Open https://grafana.healthtech.michaelalinks.com without logging in. Anonymous
   visitors have the Viewer role in Main Org. The home dashboard is Grafana
   & Prometheus Overview, also available under the Assessment folder. Allow
   a minute for initial samples. Admin management still requires logging in
   as admin with the Secret Manager password. Anonymous viewers can read
   dashboards and query the demo datasource, but cannot edit configuration.

Configuration
-------------
External Secrets uses the existing Workload Identity-enabled controller to
fetch the password. Grafana itself needs no GCP or Kubernetes API access.
The password initializes the admin account on a fresh database. Updating
Secret Manager later does not reset an existing Grafana account password;
change that password through Grafana and update Secret Manager to match
before a rebuild. No secret payload is part of these manifests.

Kustomize generates versioned ConfigMaps for grafana.ini, datasource and
provider YAML, dashboard JSON and Prometheus configuration. Their changed
names update pod templates and trigger a rollout. Grafana provisions a fixed
Prometheus datasource UID and a dashboard referring to that UID. UI edits
to those provisioned resources are disabled; make changes in Git.

Prometheus scrapes itself and Grafana every 15 seconds. Dashboard panels
show target health, active time series, uptime, CPU, memory, scrape duration
and sample counts. This demonstrates integration, not comprehensive GKE
monitoring: no node exporter or kube-state-metrics is installed.

Grafana uses the existing local HTTPS ListenerSet attached to the central
Envoy Gateway. ExternalDNS publishes the HTTPRoute hostname. Prometheus
has only a ClusterIP Service and no public HTTPRoute.

Storage and tradeoffs
---------------------
Grafana SQLite data uses a 2Gi standard-rwo PVC. Prometheus uses 10Gi and
retains up to seven days or 8GB of metrics, whichever bound is reached first.
One replica and Recreate deployment strategy avoid simultaneous writers
and RWO disk attachment conflicts. Updates can cause brief downtime.
Resources are sized for this small demonstration, not production HA.
PVCs survive pod replacement, but Flux pruning or infrastructure teardown
can delete PVCs/disks. There are no backups; rebuild restores provisioned
configuration but not historical metrics, users or UI changes.

Verification
------------
kubectl -n flux-system get gitrepositories,kustomizations
kubectl -n monitoring get deployments,pods,pvc,services
kubectl -n grafana get deployments,pods,pvc,externalsecrets,certificates,httproutes
curl --fail https://grafana.healthtech.michaelalinks.com/api/health

Expected: Flux Ready on main, workloads Available, PVCs Bound, ExternalSecret
and Certificate Ready, HTTPRoute Accepted and ResolvedRefs True. The health
endpoint should report database ok. In Grafana, check the provisioned
Prometheus datasource and dashboard: both targets should show 1, and CPU,
memory and scrape panels should contain samples. Check HTTP redirects to
HTTPS and that the browser accepts the certificate. Do not export secrets
when recording results. See the recorded checks below.

Reflection
----------
The supporting controllers automate DNS, TLS and secret delivery, while the
core monitoring manifests remain small and inspectable. Explicit app-owned
listeners keep certificates and routes alongside Grafana. The main tradeoff
is accepting downtime and limited monitoring scope to keep the assessment
lightweight. First-start testing found that automatic plugin updates tried
to modify the read-only image and stopped the Prometheus plugin. Disabling
plugin preinstallation/updates keeps bundled plugins tied to the image
version and fixed the datasource. Full teardown/rebuild and Prometheus
history persistence tests remain to be run.

References
----------
https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/
https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/kubernetes/
https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/
https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/

Recorded live verification (2026-10-04)
--------------------------------------
Flux temporarily watched feat/grafana-prometheus for pre-merge validation;
Terraform remains configured for main. All eleven Kustomizations were Ready.
Both deployments became Available, both PVCs Bound, and the ExternalSecret
reported SecretSynced/Ready without exporting its value.
Public HTTPS /api/health reported database ok; HTTP returned a 301 redirect
to HTTPS. The authenticated datasource health API successfully queried
Prometheus. Grafana's datasource proxy returned up=1 for both targets.
All seven dashboard PromQL queries returned nonempty results. The dashboard
API reported seven panels and provisioned=true, including after the plugin
configuration change replaced the pod. The existing admin account remained
usable. No browser visual inspection or full teardown/rebuild was performed.
Temporary localhost port forwarding used for testing was closed afterward.

Network isolation
-----------------
Grafana and monitoring each have a NetworkPolicy selecting all namespace
pods for ingress and egress. Grafana accepts port 3000 only from the central
Envoy proxy and Prometheus. It can connect only to Prometheus port 9090 and
DNS. Prometheus accepts port 9090 only from Grafana and itself, and can
connect only to Grafana port 3000, itself port 9090 and DNS. Response traffic
for allowed connections is permitted automatically.

DNS is allowed to kube-dns pods and the cluster's NodeLocal DNS addresses
10.45.0.10 and 169.254.20.10 on TCP/UDP 53. The service address follows the
ignored Terraform's fixed service CIDR; update it if that CIDR changes.
No GCP metadata-server access is allowed for either workload: neither needs
a cloud identity. Neither workload mounts a Kubernetes service-account token.

The ignored Terraform enables the GKE Calico addon and node enforcement.
Enabling it on an existing cluster re-creates nodes and causes downtime in
this single-node demo. Policies require active enforcement to be effective.
These policies isolate the monitoring namespaces, not every cluster workload;
controller communication remains managed by the respective installations.
Kubernetes NetworkPolicy does not provide protection from cluster/node
administrators or all host-network traffic. Anonymous viewers retain access
to the demo datasource through Grafana, including queries beyond dashboard
panels; it must contain only metrics suitable for public viewing.

Isolation verification (2026-10-06)
-----------------------------------
GKE reports networkPolicy enabled with provider CALICO; the node is labelled
projectcalico.org/ds-ready=true and calico-node is Running. Flux reconciled
all eleven Kustomizations successfully on feat/monitoring-isolation.

Before enforcement, a credential-free pod in default reached both Grafana
and Prometheus with HTTP 200. After enforcement, the same test paths timed
out (curl exit 28). Grafana connections to cert-manager's metrics endpoint
and an external HTTPS website also timed out. Public anonymous dashboard
access and datasource-proxy queries still succeeded; both scrape targets
reported up=1. The temporary test pod was removed after verification.

The added networking workloads required CPU reservation headroom. Measured
CPU usage was low, but existing requests prevented the bootstrap healthcheck
from scheduling. Flux controllers now request 25m each; Grafana, Prometheus
and the Envoy controller request 50m each. CPU requests reserve scheduling
capacity and are not hard caps. Memory settings are unchanged. The bootstrap
healthcheck requests 10m in the ignored Terraform. The original single-node
machine size is retained; no new cloud resources were added.
