Platform controllers and DNS
============================
All platform configuration is under flux/. Flux installs pinned Helm charts
for Envoy Gateway, External Secrets and ExternalDNS. The root Kustomization
creates separate Flux Kustomizations for each controller and configuration.
ExternalDNS waits for Envoy (including Gateway API CRDs); Gateway configuration
waits for Envoy; the ClusterSecretStore waits for External Secrets.

Envoy is centralised: GatewayClass envoy and Gateway public live in
namespace envoy-gateway-system. Application HTTPRoutes live in their own
namespaces and attach with:
  parentRefs:
    - name: public
      namespace: envoy-gateway-system
      sectionName: http
  hostnames:
    - grafana.iso.michaelalinks.com
  rules:
    - backendRefs:
        - name: grafana
          port: 3000
Use the application's actual Service name and port. The Gateway accepts
routes from all namespaces, matching the previous cluster's central model.
HTTPS is configured by the cert-manager installation described in
docs/https.txt. Application backend routes should use sectionName https.

ExternalDNS
-----------
Uses Google Workload Identity, no credentials Secret or JSON key.
Sources: gateway-httproute only. Gateway namespace: envoy-gateway-system.
Domain filter: iso.michaelalinks.com. Zone filter: grafana-assessment.
Ownership: TXT registry, owner iso-grafana-assessment, prefix external-dns-.
Policy sync creates/updates records and removes owned records when routes
are removed. It does not own Terraform's zone, NS/SOA or ACME challenge records.
It derives the target from the Gateway's public status address. The cloud
allocates that address through Envoy's LoadBalancer Service, not Terraform.
Do not create application A records manually: add/remove application
HTTPRoutes in Git and Flux/ExternalDNS manage the records automatically.
No application routes exist in this controller-only change, so there are
no persistent application DNS records yet.

GoDaddy: one-time delegation
---------------------------
Open michaelalinks.com -> DNS -> DNS Records -> Add New Record.
Add four records, each Type NS, Name iso, TTL default (or 1 hour):
  Value ns-cloud-c1.googledomains.com
  Value ns-cloud-c2.googledomains.com
  Value ns-cloud-c3.googledomains.com
  Value ns-cloud-c4.googledomains.com
These are the deployed Cloud DNS zone's nameservers. If recreating the zone,
check terraform output dns_nameservers in case the assignment changes.
Keep the parent domain's nameservers and unrelated records unchanged.
Remove conflicting records at exactly iso if GoDaddy prevents delegation.
DNS propagation can take time. This parent-provider step is not automated
because GoDaddy API access has not been configured.

External Secrets
----------------
ClusterSecretStore gcp-secret-manager authenticates through the controller's
annotated Kubernetes service account and GKE metadata server. It refers to
ornate-artifact-414911. No ExternalSecret fetching values is created yet.
Add required secret versions through the Secret Manager console when asked;
never place their values in Git, Terraform or the submission ZIP.
The three Kubernetes controller accounts map to the same GCP service account
as requested. IAM permissions are provided by the ignored Terraform.

Rebuild and ownership
---------------------
Ignored terraform-local/flux.tf installs Flux Operator and the FluxInstance
Helm charts. Terraform owns bootstrap; Flux owns platform releases and config.
The bootstrap reads flux/flux-system/flux-instance.yaml, but the root Kustomize
build deliberately excludes that file to avoid competing ownership.
After merging the implementation, Terraform apply bootstraps from main.
Terraform destroy runs the local Gateway cleanup hook before destroying Flux
and GKE, waiting for Gateway LoadBalancer Services to be removed.
A fresh deploy requires existing gcloud authentication, gcloud's GKE plugin,
Terraform, and kubectl (for automatic teardown); no manual Helm/kubectl apply.
The existing Flux Operator and FluxInstance Helm releases have been imported
into local Terraform state. This is not required on a fresh cluster.
Run Terraform apply once after merging this PR to register the teardown hook.
The dedicated DNS zone removes its records on Terraform destroy.
Terraform destroy deletes the Secret Manager secret and any console-created
versions: preserve that secret separately if you need values across full
infrastructure deletion. The password must otherwise be re-added in the
console after recreation; no secret values are automated in this repo.
